- [Instructor] The Servlet API is an essential component
in Java EE's web-based technologies
that provides critical features
for building web applications.
Let's start by taking a look at
the overarching concept of a servlet.
Servlets run in a servlet container,
which is a web or application server
that provides network services
for receiving requests and sending responses.
All Java EE application servers support
the servlet spec and contain a servlet container
where servlets can be initialized.
Once initialized, a servlet is available
for processing requests,
which are typically HTTP requests sent by the web browser.
Requests are processed using a servlet interface method
that corresponds to the HTTP method of the request
and then dynamic content is generated
and sent to the browser.
Servlet logic handles a variety of application concerns,
such as writing data to a database
or generating dynamic content, like HTML,
to return to the browser.
The servlet interface contains methods
that we implement for processing requests
with HTTP methods, such as GET and POST.
The Servlet API allows developers to easily interact
with HTTP requests and responses
by providing easy access and creation of headers, cookies,
parameters, and body content.
Servlets must be configured in the application,
which can be done using an annotation-based approach
introduced in Java EE 7.
Prior to that, a web.xml file was used
for initializing a servlet.
Java EE 7 also introduced asynchronous servlet processing,
which allows the servlet container to process resources
more efficiently by releasing threads
while long-running operations occur.
The main benefit of the Servlet API is
the abstraction it provides over low-level interfaces
for networking and request parsing,
making it easier for Java developers
to build web applications.
Here you see an example of a servlet
in its simple implementation of the doGET
and doPOST methods.
You will notice these methods gain access to request data
using the HTTP servlet request interface.
The content returned is created using the writer object
found on the HTTP servlet response interface.
These are two critical interfaces to understand
when working with servlets.
Within the servlet specification,
there are other useful interfaces that we can use.
For example, the HttpSession interface
manages information spanning multiple requests for a user.
The Cookie interface is used to pass data
to and from the browser with every request,
allowing some persistent state to reside on the browser.
The ServletContext allows developers to interact
with the underlying servlet container.
And finally, Filters allow for additional tasks
to be performed for every request when it's received
or when a response is returned for it.
As we work through this lesson,
We'll see how servlets can be used
to build Java web applications
and explore these interfaces in more detail.